Good afternoon.
Welcome to session 237.
My name is Mark Piccirelli.
I'm an engineer in the
Cocoa Frameworks Group.
Today I'm going to talk about
advanced iCloud document storage.
And what I mean by that,
if you were looking at our documentation,
you know there's iCloud Storage,
which includes iCloud
Document Storage and
also Key-Value Storage.
Not going to be doing any talking
about Key-Value Storage today.
Interestingly enough,
from the title of the session,
I'm actually not going to talk
about documents at all either today.
iCloud Document Storage is what we call
the ability to store files in iCloud.
And I'm not going to talk
about storing what the user
thinks of his files in iCloud.
I'm going to talk about
shoebox applications.
So what do we mean by
a shoebox application?
Well, many applications, of course,
do not deal in documents.
They show the user their data,
but they don't reveal that the
data is stored in files on disk.
So popular examples are
things like iPhoto and iTunes.
So-- and we call them this informally.
It's an informal term and we tried
to make formal term but we couldn't,
so we just stick with this.
It's like a shoebox of pictures or tapes.
What's interesting from the point of
view of this talk is that I'm going to
be talking about the kind of applications
where you don't get to use AppKit's
NSDocument class or UIKit's UIDocument
class because those provide a model.
It's very useful,
but it's just not appropriate
for most kinds of what we
call shoebox applications.
[Transcript missing]
So file coordination in the context
of iCloud Document Storage is
pretty important because
iCloud Document Storage,
maybe more than anywhere else,
introduces multiple processes
accessing the same file.
Of course,
there have always been situations
where multiple processes
are accessing the same file,
but now with iCloud,
they're really going at it.
iCloud is downloading things to
disk while your application is
showing those things on disk to user.
Of course, when I say disk,
I also mean SSD about half the time.
- But since these introduce a situation,
we have to deal with problems like
the fact that one process writing
a file while another is reading
is bad because the process that's
reading might read inconsistent
or incomplete contents because the
first process is still writing stuff.
So it begs the question,
how does a process know when
it is safe to read or write?
Another thing that comes up is the
fact that iCloud changes files and
then your application must read them.
It automatically downloads data from
the network and leaves the files on
disk and then your application has to
bounce that up and show it to the user.
So we need an answer to the question,
how does a process
know when it must read?
and one last thing is that iCloud
needs your files up to date on
disk to do conflict detection.
So in the example I showed
you of a picture editor,
when the user's editing things
like the rating or adding keywords
on there or something like that,
there are times where iCloud needs you
to stamp that stuff on disk because
it needs to read it immediately.
So we need an answer to the question,
how does the process
know when it must write?
And the answer to all these
questions is file coordination,
which number one is a locking
mechanism in that it prevents your
application from reading while
iCloud writes and vice versa,
and actually also vice versa.
So this is not totally novel.
There have been plenty of locking
mechanisms in the history of computers.
But file coordination is also a
notification mechanism in that
it tells your application when
iCloud changes have happened.
And once again, this is not the first
time this has happened.
There's FS events, there's KQs,
and there's Vino dispatch sources.
But one good thing is that this is all
one mechanism and it helps us avoid a lot
of race conditions and things like that.
But the most novel aspect of it is
that it's also a triggering mechanism.
In that when something like
iCloud reads or writes files,
your application gets a
chance to do things first.
So that's kind of new.
The File Coordination
API takes the form of,
number one,
a class called NSFileCoordinator,
which you instantiate on the basis of,
you know, one per fairly large-scale
file operation,
like saving a big batch of changes or
moving the file or something like that.
You instantiate it and then you use
it to do coordinated file access.
The other big piece of the API is
a protocol called NSFilePresenter,
and it's a protocol that you
implement in your application
to hear about coordinated file
access done by other processes
that are using NSFileCoordinator.
So, and I mentioned NSDocument and
UIDocument do a bunch of stuff for you,
you know, in applications where
those are applicable.
This is one of the big
things they do for you.
They implement the
NSFilepresenter protocol for you.
[Transcript missing]
So I'm not going to go through all
the NSFileCoordinator API at all.
Just for people who are brand new to it,
I'm just going to give a
little introduction here.
These are the two most
unsurprising methods in the class.
CoordinateReadingItemAtURL and
CoordinateWritingItemAtURL.
[Transcript missing]
So the NSFilePresenter, half of the API,
there's two main ways to use it.
The first one is that you register a
file presenter of an individual file.
So, you know,
you instantiate some class of your own.
It could be the application delegate,
for example, and you invoke a method
add file presenter.
And when you do that, from then on,
while you're registered,
you'll hear about the file being
changed by other processes and also
being moved by other processes.
Thank you.
So you'll also get asked to save changes.
I'll tell you in a little bit why
iCloud might ask you to save changes,
but the idea is that
this is very generic.
So you're not even really
supposed to care why you're
being asked to save changes.
Just that, you know,
the contract is that you have a file
presenter and if you're letting the
user edit what's being presented,
when you're asked to,
you write that to disk.
You might also be asked to do what
we call accommodating deletion.
And accommodate is an
intentionally generic term.
What do you mean accommodate?
Well, it depends on your application.
You know,
very often it means stop presenting that
file to the user because it's going away.
And if that's something
that's selected in the UI,
you know, select something else,
the next thing in the list
or something like that.
And a somewhat more abstract concept
is that you might be asked to
relinquish to readers and writers.
And I'll talk about that in a little bit.
So the other thing you can
do with NSFilePrecenter,
even though its name is NSFilepresenter,
it's actually kind of abbreviation
for NSFile or FilePackage or
other kind of directory presenter.
You can register a file presenter
of an entire directory tree to find
out as files are changed and moved
anywhere inside that directory tree.
So in a substantial shoebox application,
you'll probably end
up using it both ways.
Your shoebox has a directory
full of files and you want
to know as they come and go.
But when your UI is letting
the user focus on one
particular item or something,
you'll register as a file presenter
of the file that backs that item.
The kind of messages that you have
to respond to when you're a file
presenter include the ones where you
get notified about an individual file.
For example, presented item did change
is sent to your application,
your file presenter,
whenever the file is changed,
whether that's the contents
or the metadata or what.
The idea is that you're supposed
to look at what's on disk
and find out what changed.
You also get messages about
presented item did move to
URL when it's renamed or moved.
Your file presenter isn't
merely notified about things.
It also gets told to do important things.
When you register,
you register a file presenter, again,
when you first present the
corresponding item in the UI so
that you get messages like this.
And the idea is that you stay
registered until you're done letting
the user view or edit the item.
So, you know,
you don't want to let the file
presenters pile up or something like
that because you will get messages
for each one of them when appropriate.
In the context of iCloud...
[Transcript missing]
And in the typical usage,
when a file's been deleted,
the usual action,
I say typically and I say words
like should instead of must because,
you know,
there's going to be a great variety of
applications that people write with us,
so it's a little early to
lay down a blanket rule.
But you should deregister your file
presenter when the file's going away.
So the more abstract concept
that I mentioned before,
this concept of relinquishment,
when something does a coordinated
reading or writing of your file,
your file presenter is asked
to relinquish to it first.
And this is another one of those
intentionally generic names.
Relinquish what?
Well, it's relinquish doing whatever
you can't do when something else
is reading or writing the file.
So it might be something that's
reflected in the UI or it may make
a timer stop or something like that.
But aside from that,
what's interesting about these methods
is that they're both your first and last
notification that something has happened.
So notice, by the way,
those methods take a block that returns,
they take a block that returns a block.
So what you do is when you're asked to
relinquish a presented item to a writer,
for example, you, when you are able to,
you invoke the writer block that
you're passed and you pass it
what's called a reacquirer block.
When that writer is done,
your reacquirer block will be invoked.
So you find out both the beginning and
the end of operations by other processes.
And what's interesting about that is
that it ends up being a very handy
way to delineate batches of the other
messages that an NS file presenter gets.
A pretty common situation in iCloud is
that iCloud needs to both change a file
because that's what the user did on
another device and also rename it all
in the same operation because that's
what's happened in another device.
So in response to messages like
presented item did change or
presented item did move to URL,
very often you don't actually do
anything right then other than
note the fact that it happened.
And when your file presenter
reacquires the file,
you handle both things at the same time,
if that's what it takes to be
correct in your application.
So those are messages
about individual files.
You can, as I mentioned earlier,
you can also use NSFilePrecenter to get
notified about things in your directory.
For example,
presented sub-item did change
at URL or presented sub-item
at URL did move to URL.
And these are the two most
interesting ones that are other
ones in the headers like presented
sub-item did appear at URL.
You should probably ignore that.
If you've been experimenting with this,
you find out it doesn't actually
get sent in the context of iCloud.
So when a file appears,
you'll just get presented
sub-item did change at URL.
So let's go through, you know,
a sequence of how this stuff
ends up appearing to be used in
a typical shoebox application.
Here's our picture viewing application.
It just has two pictures appearing.
They're pictures of the
numbers one and two.
So and the user adds another one.
They add a third item.
So what the application
has to do is it has to do a
coordinated write of the file.
to disk to the applications
iCloud storage space.
And a quick code sample,
the way you do it is you instantiate
a file coordinator and you invoke this
method coordinate writing item at URL.
And these kind of methods, by the way,
you want to try avoid invoking them
on the main thread because other
processes might do other things
before it's your turn to do things.
But when it is your turn to write,
your block will be invoked and then
you'll use the APIs we've always had,
things like NSData and NSFileWrapper,
the POSIX APIs for writing to disk.
The file coordination
mechanism is something that
you wrap around file access.
So it doesn't actually introduce
any new file access APIs of its own.
So here's a pretty typical use of
a file wrapper where this picture
object that can save itself knows
how to create a file wrapper and then
just stamp it on disk where it goes.
When the application has
written the file to disk,
iCloud,
without any other action on your part,
uploads the file to the cloud if the
machine is connected to the network.
If it's not,
it waits until it is connected.
So it's its job to deal
with issues like that.
All right.
So, but iCloud is most useful when you
have multiple devices connected to it.
So in our example, we have the same
application running on iPad.
[Transcript missing]
So that was the regular case of the
application on one device writes
to disk and that gets uploaded to
iCloud and it gets downloaded onto
another device and it's read there.
But there are more complicated
situations and they introduce
the need for file versions.
So users, of course,
can edit on multiple devices at once.
And at once can mean literally at once,
though people probably
don't do that that often.
But it also means virtually at once
where because one of the machines
is disconnected from the network,
one or both, and then eventually when
it gets reconnected,
a whole bunch of uploading to and
downloading from the cloud happens.
So and then all the other
machines hear about it.
So, and this can result in conflicts
because the user can make a change on
their iPad while it's in airport mode,
for example, or airplane mode.
And, you know,
and then they get home and they
start working on their Macintosh
and they forgot they already
changed the stuff on iPads,
so they edit on Macintosh.
And then they remember to take their iPad
out of airplane mode and then everything,
you know, crosses paths as things gets
uploaded and downloaded.
And now we have two versions
of a bunch of files.
So, and those are conflicts.
So the iCloud machinery is
pretty cool in that it senses
conflicts and it picks a winner.
So when you have a file and there's
two possible contents because they're
saved on two different machines,
iCloud picks one.
And I think the rule right now is
it picks the most recent change,
though it doesn't have to be that way.
That's what it does.
And it puts the winning
contents actually in the file,
in the file system where the
application expects to find it.
So and it does this even when
your application is not running.
And the idea is that every file
always has some decent contents in it.
It might not be exactly what the
user wants because the user hasn't
been told what they did yet.
But there's always, you know,
something in there and it's good.
This matters a lot more in document-based
applications where on OS X it's
possible with the All My Files window
to actually drag things out of iCloud,
you know, onto the desktop or, you know,
on the desktop.
Or email them to somebody
as an attachment.
So we want to make sure that every
file has something good in it.
But even in the context of a shoebox app,
it's good that when your
application first launches,
there is not, you know,
something crazy in the files.
So that's iCloud sensing.
That's not really iCloud
resolving conflicts,
though.
So who does resolve conflicts?
Well,
your application must resolve conflicts,
either because it gets a
message while it's running or
the next time it's launched.
So when I said iCloud picks winners,
well, your application might
have to look at the losers.
And that begs the question,
where did iCloud leave them?
And the answer is that it
leaves them in NSFileVersions.
So NSFileVersion is a really generic API.
I don't even know if it
came up first for iCloud.
It's also used by NSDocument's
autosaving mechanism.
If you go to the versions browser
and something like TextEdit on OS X,
you'll see multiple
versions of your document.
Those are all NSFileVersions.
So the API is pretty generic.
You can get the file version that
corresponds to the current file and
also NSFileVersions that correspond
to other versions of a file.
And where are they stored?
Well, they're stored somewhere
else on the volume.
If you want to find out,
just look at the URL for them.
But, you know,
if that's subject to change,
you're not supposed to care too much.
And if you're wondering, hey,
doesn't this waste space?
No, it diffs stuff.
It just saves changes on disk.
Amen.
So, but for iCloud,
what really matters are the
versions that represent unresolved
conflicts of any particular file.
And you get a list of
them using this method.
And once you get an NSFile version,
what you do, and it really depends
on your application,
how you do this,
the UI that you use to do this,
you present the different
versions to the user.
That can be as simple as, you know,
a sheet that tells the user,
here are your different versions,
and they can be identified
by localized name.
You know,
and when we say localized in our API,
we usually just mean
presentable to the user.
So this is the display name of the file.
And by the way,
the reason this is a property of NSFile,
is because files can get renamed but
still be considered the same file.
So that is something you can
show to the user when the user
creates conflicts that way.
Also,
the display name of the saving computer,
that's a really important hint
that you can show to the user
about what this conflict is about,
and also the modification date,
when they changed it.
And first of all, of course, is the URL.
Where are the contents of the version?
So, you know,
you might want to show that to
the user or you just use it,
you know, you might want to show that to
you know, when you resolve the conflict.
In general, the way that you use NSFile
version to resolve conflicts,
well, there's a couple things.
One of the methods NSFile version
has is called replace item at URL.
And what that is,
is it takes the content,
it takes the contents of a
file version and puts it in,
you know,
a normal place in the file system.
It makes a real file out of a version
instead of something that's merely
attached to another file as a version.
And there's a couple
different ways to use it.
For example,
if your application shows the conflict to
the user and the user disagrees with what
iCloud chose when it sensed the conflict,
use this to override it.
You can pass as the URL the
URL of the original file when
you invoke replace item at URL.
You can replace the actual file
that this version came from.
[Transcript missing]
So as I mentioned before,
this stuff is kind of generic.
Not all file versions
represent conflicts.
So when you do get one of these messages,
you should check to see
if it is a conflict.
This is a Boolean property,
just conflict.
So conflicts can also be resolved
from the point of view of your
application running on a device at any
time because the user might resolve
the conflicts on another device.
So it's pretty common for, you know,
while you're testing to see conflicts,
your conflict UI appear on two
devices at the same time right
next to each other because,
you know,
you're doing crazy things that a
user probably wouldn't do but you
still have to do them during testing.
So but the result is that, you know,
when you dismiss a sheet or whatever
that you're using on one device,
that should be dismissed
automatically on the other device too.
The user shouldn't have to repeat
themselves during conflict resolution.
So it happens on the other device,
the one that the user...
Didn't resolve the conflict on.
It'll get messages like this.
Presented item did resolve conflict
version or presented sub-item at
URL did resolve conflict version.
So it's important to keep in mind,
you know, while you're presenting
UI for conflict resolution,
you know, more of these messages
will be coming and going.
You know, more conflicts might be
discovered if the user,
you know, plugs in another device to the
network or something or they might
go away completely dynamically.
So you have to keep listening
for these messages even when
you're handling... You know,
you're not going to be able to
get the same message back to
the network or the same device.
So you have to keep listening for these
messages even when you're handling
ones that you've already gotten.
So what's it look like in practice?
You know, how do these APIs show up when
something is actually happening?
Well, let's show up.
Let's start with, you know,
our iPad and our iMac again.
But this time the iPad
is in airplane mode.
[Transcript missing]
So it'll leave it on disk and
that's where it'll stop for now.
But when the user eventually does
take the iPad out of airplane mode
and lets it connect to the network,
What happens is that the version that
was in the cloud gets downloaded,
the version that was
on disk gets uploaded,
and now both the cloud and the
iPad have two versions on them.
Actually, the Macintosh does too,
but it's out of the picture right now.
And so the applications file
presenter on the iPad will receive
a message that looks like this.
Presented sub-item at
URL did gain version.
And the UI that you're going to
do for this is very different
for each kind of application.
So,
but what it should do is it should check
to see if the version is a conflict.
And really in the context of
an iCloud application handling
the files that it's put,
you know, in its iCloud store on disk,
of course it's going to be a conflict.
But before you start doing
conflict type things with it,
you should at least
check just to not crash,
basically.
When it does this,
it finds out that there's a conflict for
a file or a conflict version for a file.
It should say, you know,
is this a file I even recognize?
In this case,
this program has a method picture a URL.
I don't, you know,
do we even recognize this URL?
And if so,
and it discovers that there's a
conflict of some sort for this picture,
it should present that to the user.
So, and while it's presenting
that to the user,
it still has to handle other
messages of this sort coming in.
So, but when your UI is all done,
and the users made their choice,
the application writes
the contents on to disk.
It actually probably isn't taking it
from memory and writing it on disk.
It probably just uses NS file version
replace item at URL in this case.
And once that's done,
that is automatically propagated to
the cloud by the iCloud machinery,
the agents and demons
running on OS X or iOS.
And then that conflict resolution will
automatically propagate to other devices
like this Macintosh that's connected.
So because the user chose
the version that the user
had edited on the Macintosh,
there's actually no news to report to
the file presenter on the Macintosh.
So that one doesn't get another message.
It's just that now the iPad and
the Mac are showing the same items.
So some tips and advice.
First of all, at application startup,
there's a new method for you to use to
even find out if iCloud is turned on.
There's a couple different
ways to turn off iCloud.
There is not being logged
into iCloud at all.
And then also in the
iCloud preferences pane,
there is a checkbox where you can
turn off iCloud documents and data.
And there's a bunch of checkboxes there,
but this is the one we're talking about,
the documents and data one.
Your application, you know,
is probably going to do different
things depending on whether
or not iCloud is turned on.
It's still pretty early
days in developing,
you know, UI for this sort of thing.
Some people just want to say, you know,
my application only works if
you're logged into iCloud.
Other people are storing, you know,
two copies of things so that
in case the user logs out.
So we'll see which kind of
applications people like best.
But when your application has to
make decisions at launch time,
this is the one that it should do.
So what's interesting about ubiquity
identity token is number one,
this method is fast enough
to use on the main thread,
unlike this existing NS file manager
method URL for ubiquity container.
So this has been kind of a big issue.
You know, what do I do during startup?
I don't want my
application to just block.
Well, the answer is that you invoke
ubiquity identity token.
By the way, what's the... By the way,
what's the token about it is it's
a different token depending on
what account the user logged into.
So the user, of course,
can log out and then log back into
a completely different account.
These tokens are both encodable if
you need to record something to match,
you know, what the user's logged into.
And they're also comparable too.
So you still have to invoke URL for
ubiquity container at some point.
The answer is it didn't get that
much... It got a little faster,
it didn't get that much faster.
You should try not to invoke
it on the main thread.
So while you're doing stuff on
your initial reading thread,
you should be showing good UI,
letting the user, you know,
know what they're waiting for.
And so because the user can log
out or log back in or just turn off
iCloud documents and data completely,
you should be listening for this
NS notification center notifications,
not NS distributed notification
center notifications.
Yeah.
And NS ubiquity identity did change.
So and the ubiquity identity
token stuff is new in OS X,
10.8 and iOS 6.
So when you're reading files,
as I showed you in the graphics before,
coordinated reading can
trigger downloading.
And that, of course, can take a while.
Everything that involves network
access can take an unpredictable while.
So this is something you want to
avoid doing on the main thread.
So I think, in general, the advice,
don't do file system
access on the main thread,
is just getting repeated over and
over again on both iOS and OS X.
So the fact that reading is
coordinated doesn't really change that.
You still have to do good error checking.
For example,
NSFileCoordinator coordinate reading,
it returns an NSError.
It might be an error about something
like the file couldn't be downloaded.
Even if that doesn't return
an error and your block,
your reading block is invoked,
you still have to do good error checking.
The file might not even exist.
And that's correct.
So the file might have been
deleted while you're away.
You're waiting to read it.
NSFileCoordination isn't going to
call that an error just because
somebody else deleted the file
while you were waiting to read it.
[Transcript missing]
So, and then you might notice if you've
already written code with this,
had an NSFilePresenter,
the file doesn't actually get
deleted a lot of the time.
A lot of the time it just gets moved.
So that is iCloud's caching machinery.
When a file like that gets deleted,
it might come back pretty quick in
a bunch of different situations.
So iCloud isn't in a big
hurry to delete it off disk.
It will eventually.
But in the meantime,
it just moves it into a directory that
was supposed to be kind of a secret.
It ended up not being so secret.
Whose name starts with .ubd.
You only notice this if you don't
deregister your file presenter when
you're told that a file is being deleted.
But what we want you to do is
try not to take advantage of the
implementation details like that.
They will see if you don't
deregister your NSFilepresenter.
So when we say deletion in the context of
NSFilepresenter or something like that,
it's a pretty high level operation.
It doesn't necessarily map exactly to,
you know, the underlying POSIX calls.
It's, you know,
it's at a higher level what the
user might think of as deletion.
And of course,
something like deletion to the user,
you know,
the item is gone doesn't necessarily
mean that the file has to be gone.
So this is kind of,
it's kind of the thing throughout the
file coordinator and file presenter APIs.
They operate at a higher level.
So you don't do, for example,
a coordinated read for
each individual POSIX call.
You do it when you are
loading a document's contents.
Things like that.
So then they're meant to wrap around
sequences of lower level operations.
Some advice that comes from, you know,
watching how people have
been using this already.
Save settings in the right place.
So preferences like scroll
bar and window positions,
it's kind of questionable a lot of the
time whether or not those go in your
document at all because all of our
devices support different screen sizes.
Even before then,
there was always a possibility
of giving something like a
document to another person.
But even when we're not
even worrying about,
you know,
giving documents to other people,
we're just talking about
the same user using,
you know, the stuff in their shoebox.
They're still using
multiple devices to do that.
So it may as well be different
users from the point of view
of things like screen sizes.
So be careful about what you write
in files that get uploaded to iCloud.
[Transcript missing]